[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: We spend a
third of our lives sleeping.
What if we could use that time
to expand our consciousness,
problem solve, create?
Charlie Morley says that,
if we can consciously
engage with our dreams, an
entire world opens up to us
to both play in and heal in.
Lucidity in dreams means greater
lucidity in our daily lives.
First of all, welcome, Charlie.
I love the subject of dreams.
And we're going to start out
with the big question first.
And then, we'll kind of
back-engineer the story
from there.
>>CHARLIE MORLEY:
Sounds good to me.
>>REGINA: The big question is--
some people and some
ancient traditions
believe this is the dream and
that that is our real life.
What do you think about that?
>>MORLEY: Big question-- I
can't say for sure whether this
is all a dream-like illusion.
And when we go to sleep,
it's less of a dream or more
of a dream.
And when we die, it's less of
a dream or more of a dream.
I don't know.
But what I do know is,
the same rule applies.
Right now, if this were
a lucid dream rather than
waking reality, I would know
that you are part of me.
That you are not
separate from me.
And because you're
part of me, I'm
going to give you all of my
attention and all of my love.
So I think the
same rule applies.
If we can show love
in the waking state,
love in the dream state, and
love and the after death state,
then we cover all bases.
Because love is the
most powerful force
there is in the universe.
So I don't know what's
the dream and what's not.
But I know that I'm going to
show love as much as I can.
>>REGINA: Well,
what's interesting is,
if this what we call daily
life is but a dream--
as some traditions believe,
that when we're out of the body
we're our true selves--
then we could treat life
with so much more adventure.
We could experiment and
create and play more.
But because we think this is
it, this is all we've got,
we take it so seriously.
And we really cut
off our creativity
and don't take the
chances we would
take if we saw it otherwise.
>>MORLEY: Exactly-- so my
teacher, Lama Yeshe Rinpoche,
who's the abbot of Samye
Ling Monastery in Scotland,
the Tibetan refugee
from the '60s, '70s.
He said that one of the greatest
benefits of lucid dreaming--
so the art of training the
mind to become conscious within
your dreams--
is that it gives you a
better sense of humor.
And out of all these amazing
kind of Tibetan Buddhist things
where it said to train yourself
for the moment of death
and do your spiritual
practice in your sleep,
he said the best thing is, it
gives you a sense of humor.
Because in a lucid
dream, you can
interact with things that
seem as real as this.
In a lucid dream, I can
touch the lucid dream chair.
And it will feel like this.
It will have the same
texture as this material.
I can touch my arm.
And I can even notice
the hairs on my arm.
So I see that the human
mind has a huge potential
to create dreamlike illusion.
This means that
the next time I'm
in the waking state,
whatever that means,
I can also interact with this
dream with a similar sense
of flexibility.
One of the trainings is
to walk through walls
in your lucid dreams.
Now, for ages, I thought
this was a practice
so eventually you can walk
through walls in this state.
What I now realize is,
the reason my teacher
was training me to do that was
because nothing seems to be
more solid than a brick wall.
So if in the lucid
dream state you
can train yourself to
walk through a brick wall,
you're creating a new
habit of mind that says--
things that seem to be
solid are not always so.
So the next time you
confront the brick wall
of your own self-doubt in
the waking state, the brick
wall of your own poor me in
wall of your own bull
in the waking state,
so too can you walk through that
and see it as as flexible as it
was in the lucid dream.
And this gives us
a sense of humor.
>>REGINA: It does.
And not only that,
you can practice.
There's nothing but
time and opportunity
in the dream world to practice.
And to work things
through, even--
we'll talk about this later.
Because as you say,
in your experience,
99% of what we
encounter is ourselves
in one degree or another.
But there's still that 1%.
And we still do
connect with others.
And we can practice and play out
into the future with ourselves
and with others.
So it's a wonderful
experimental ground, right.
And that should be reflected
in our daily life as one big--
I think Buckminster
Fuller said that he
was suicidal at one point.
He had failed at some things.
And finally, he realized
life is just an experiment.
I'm just going to make
everything an experiment.
Major contributions
to this planet.
But it was that attitude
that it's all an experiment.
And that's what I
love about the notion
of taking the lucid dream
state into the waking state.
So let's talk about where
lucid dreaming happens
on a physiological level.
We'll get into a little
bit in the science of it,
the prefrontal
cortex and so forth.
And how we can start tapping
into or waking that part up.
And then, we'll go into
the Tibetan dream yoga.
>>CHARLIE MORLEY: Absolutely--
so your question there
about training, using
the lucid dream state
as a rehearsal space for
the waking state, that's
been talked about in Tibetan
Buddhism for thousands
of years.
But now, we have
science to back it up.
>>REGINA: Talk about some of it.
>>CHARLIE MORLEY: OK, so when
you are having a non-lucid
dream--
so your normal everyday dreams
where you're dreaming away
but don't know you're dreaming--
the back part of
the brain, the brain
stem, visual cortex
highly activated.
But the front part of
the brain, especially
the prefrontal cortex,
is deactivated.
And the prefrontal cortex,
scientists believe,
is where your sense of self
resides, your sense of agency.
Your sense of I am Charlie
having experience is
around the prefrontal cortex.
>>REGINA: Right, and that's
where a lot of beta activity
happens.
And it's where we
go about our life.
Kind of a lot of left brain
activity and so forth as well.
>>MORLEY: Exactly-- now,
in a non-lucid dream,
that is de-activated.
Which is why you
can happily dream
that you are the queen of
Egypt and you believe it.
It's only when we wake up the
prefrontal cortex switches back
on.
And we go-- oh, I'm not
really the queen of Egypt.
I was dreaming I was
the queen of Egypt.
On that basis, when
we have a lucid dream,
we now know what part of
the brain is activated.
It is, of course, the
prefrontal cortex.
So you are dreaming away
you are the queen of Egypt.
And then, suddenly, prefrontal
cortex becomes engaged.
Ah, I'm not really
the queen of Egypt.
I'm having a lucid dream about
being the queen of Egypt.
Now, once that happens, not only
is your sense of self engaged.
So you can decide what to do.
But once the prefrontal
cortex is activated,
neuroplasticity
becomes activated too.
And this is where it
gets really interesting.
Neuroplasticity, of
course, the phenomena
of the brain to
rewire itself in favor
of a repeated action or habit.
Neurons that fire together wire
together-- the classic thing,
right.
Once you get lucid, what
you do in the lucid dream--
how you spend the
lucid dream-- actually
rewires your brain in
favor of that activity.
This means that you can
learn in your lucid dreams.
So interestingly, the first
people to put funding into this
were the German Sports
Science Association
at Heidelberg University.
Because they thought--
well, if you can actually
retrain your brain
through lucid dreaming,
what if we teach it to athletes?
So they did a big study,
over 100 athletes involved.
They whittled it
down to about 20
who could learn lucid dreaming,
spend a few months training
so they could have these
lucid dreams almost at will.
They put them into
the brain scanners.
They gave them all the
psychological tests.
Then, once they got lucid,
out of all the amazing things
they could do in
their lucid dream--
like meeting your inner
child and integrating trauma,
like working with stressful
situations in the daytime
and reframing them
through your dreams,
like meeting godhead, meeting
Buddha in your lucid dreams--
no, they were told to do squats.
So literally, in the lucid dream
they're dropping, doing squats.
>>REGINA: Build
those quadriceps.
>>MORLEY: Exactly.
The next day, they put them
back in the brain scanners.
They gave them all the
psychological tests.
Long story short,
they found that they
could increase their
capacity to do squats
by training in the lucid dream.
Some of them actually
had increased
muscle mass due to the
training in the lucid dream.
Now of course, it's not
that their muscles were
growing in the lucid dream.
Because they were just
imagining doing it.
But they were strengthening
the neural pathways.
Which meant in the
waking state when
they did squats they
could do more of them.
And this led to
increased muscle mass.
So this is squats, right.
They did the same for
press-ups and stuff like that.
But so what?
We can get a nice bum and tum if
we work out in the lucid dream.
Imagine if we practice our
meditation in the lucid dream
and create those
neural pathways.
Imagine if we practice
love and kindness,
if we practice compassion, if
we practice being the person
that we know we could
be if we could just
remove that block of fear that
stops us being that person.
That's how we can really
retrain our brains
through lucid dreaming.
>>REGINA: That's interesting.
Because as you're
speaking about that,
I'm thinking about another
person I interviewed recently.
Which went back to a book
that was written in 1960,
I believe, called
Psycho-Cybernetics.
And there were
others at the time
too that he referenced
that did a lot of studies
that had to do with people doing
this but during waking time.
Simply in a relaxed state,
daydreaming a repeated reality
over the course of
21 days, or 30 days,
depending on whoever
the clinical group was.
And finding these
very similar results.
But it was a daydreaming
kind of experience.
Now, would you say
qualitatively there
would be any maybe difference
between the daydreaming
and the lucid dreaming
version of that?
>>MORLEY: Very
interesting question.
The control condition for some
of those studies with athletes
and lucid dreaming was daytime
visualized preparation.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>MORLEY: What they found was,
simply because the lucid dream
is the most 100% visualization
a human being will ever
experience--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
it's full-sensory.
>>MORLEY: Exactly.
That visualized
training techniques
work with far greater
efficacy in the lucid dream
than in the waking state.
So yes, like visualized
training max.
>>REGINA: So we can go into
the same field of intention.
But it's set into motion with
our intention in dream time.
Rather than doing
our affirmations,
our mantras, our visualization
during the daytime.
Not that that hurts anything.
It doesn't.
But you're saying it's more
efficacious if we actually
set it into motion intentionally
before we go to sleep?
>>MORLEY: Yes-- I
think we still have
to do the work in the daytime.
Just like those athletes
who are practicing squats
in the lucid dream
only got better
at squats when they practiced
them in the waking state,
so too our meditation,
our compassion,
our mantra recitation
in the lucid dreams
is incredibly powerful.
From the Buddhist
tradition, it said
you have between seven
and nine times the power
of consciousness when you
engage a spiritual practice
in the lucid dream compared
to the waking state.
But although we are asleep
for 1/3 of our life--
so let's make use of that 1/3
to do our spiritual practice--
we're awake for 2/3.
It does no good just
doing the lucid dreaming
and forgetting about
the waking state.
We've got to keep
them both in balance.
>>REGINA: Absolutely--
OK, here's
something that
some people wonder
what the difference might be.
So if they say we
leave the body--
some aspect of ourselves
leaves the body
but still remains connected
through this little silvery
cord as we sleep at night--
what's happening when we,
say, astral travel or have
an out-of-body experience
in comparison to dream time?
Because for a lot
of people it would
seem a very similar experience.
>>MORLEY: Yeah, so my wife's
actually the expert on this.
She teaches workshops on
out-of-body experience.
And I do the lucid
dreaming stuff.
We would both agree that
a lucid dream is actually
the mind flipped inwardly.
So the lucid dream is
absolutely an in-body, in-brain
experience.
You are exploring the totality
of your own psychology
in personified form.
So if you meet your
dad in a lucid dream,
it's not really your dad.
It might have a little aspect.
It is your psychological
projection of your relationship
with the father archetype.
So everything's internal.
However, an
out-of-body experience
is pretty much the opposite.
In a verified
out-of-body experience,
an aspect of your
consciousness or your--
to use a Buddhist
term-- mindstream
is dislocating from the
gross corporeal form,
your physical body.
And experiencing
either an energy
duplicate of waking
reality or, in many cases,
waking reality itself.
So they are different.
A lot of people get confused
between lucid dreams and OBEs.
But in fact, a
full-on OBE, for one,
you don't have to be asleep.
You can do it in the hypnogogic
state as you're falling asleep.
And you can do it in
the meditation state.
>>REGINA: Right,
and in dream time,
you're virtually always
safe in that that mechanism
automatically knows what
to do and how to do it.
Where out of body
and astral travel,
you better be
skilled and know what
you're getting yourself into.
>>MORLEY: Brilliant
point-- in the lucid dream,
you are dealing with your
own internal environment.
It's your own psychology.
Now, I don't know about you,
but my internal psychology
is still pretty scary.
So you can still go to some
deep, dark places and wake
up with a bit of a fright.
>>REGINA: I was going to bring
the question up in a minute.
Go ahead.
>>MORLEY: But it's
your shadow concept.
It's your psychology.
However, when you have an OBE,
you ain't in Kansas anymore.
You're out there.
So in the same way you can
walk down a street in London
1,000 times.
And 999 times you'll
be safe, but maybe one
in 1,000 times someone
steals your phone.
Someone tries to nick your
wallet, as we say in London.
Who knows-- maybe it's the
same with the OBE world.
So I think, if we are
going out, we just
need to be aware that
we are in a place that
may be shared with others.
So I would suggest anyone who is
doing out-of-body work to do it
from a foundation.
Or at least learn
from someone with
a lineage-based foundation.
Someone who is linked
to something that's been
going longer than they have.
Something that is
a power source.
Whether it's a spiritual
lineage, or the lineage
of a certain teacher, or
even the lineage of a plant
medicine.
That gives you a safety net
with which you can go out
of body with a sense of safety.
Whereas, I think if you
just kind of pick up a book
and you're just kind of
by yourself out there,
I don't know how
confident I'd feel.
>>REGINA: Well I can attest to
that because I'm an explorer.
Or I like to adventure.
And a lot of times, I'll
just do it on the fly.
Which gets you into some
pretty interesting situations.
And one time, I did end up
in a very dicey situation
out-of-body into another realm.
It was a place I
hadn't seen before.
Kind of everything
was gray, kind
of gray and pale blue shades.
And a terrible lurking energy.
And I couldn't find my way out.
And actually, my dog--
who was always silent during
these types of meditations--
for the first time and only time
jumped up and barked and jumped
on my meditation partner.
We were there at the same time.
We would travel together.
And jumped on her.
She screamed.
It snapped me back.
But I was damaged.
I was actually damaged.
>>MORLEY: So the dog
sensed the danger, wow.
>>REGINA: The dog
sensed the danger.
And then, I had a
dream a couple nights
later that this whole side
of my aura was blown out
and black and a hole,
basically, leaking.
And that I would be dead within
18 months if it wasn't fixed.
And so I won't tell you
what I went through.
But I went through some things.
They instantly saw
what was going on.
It was all repaired.
But it was scary.
What I did do though was,
I thought-- well, come on,
not really.
But I was scared
enough by the dream
I went to one of those
aura photography machines.
Because someone said-- oh,
there's a new one in Sedona.
It's actually really good.
And I thought-- yeah, right.
Usually, they're pretty basic.
It showed that exact thing.
Right in that place, the whole
thing was black and blown out.
So I took it seriously, got
some help, and got fixed up.
But I'm just bringing
it up because I just
went without any understanding
of what I was doing.
And it's not a good place to go.
>>MORLEY: It's a great example.
It's-- god, it makes me feel
so lucky actually to be part
of the lineage.
The one time--
I've had quite a few dozen OBEs.
Hundreds of lucid dreams but
only a few dozen out-of-body
experiences.
And just on one
occasion, I went out.
And I was actually
feeling very high-energy.
But I think maybe that's
kind of like you then
become a beacon for energy.
And just once, this thing
kind of-- felt like a leech--
this energy form just
kind of latched onto me.
And I started getting tired.
And I was like-- oh, whoa,
this has never happened.
This is sucking my energy.
And I just--
I didn't even have a chance
to say my Lama's name.
But I just thought--
Lama Yeshe Rinpoche.
I just thought of Buddha.
And it wasn't like
this thing let go.
It was like the thing
had never latched on.
And I realized-- wow,
in that space, if you--
>>REGINA: You shifted
your frequencies, yeah.
>>MORLEY: Yeah, and
if you can connect
to a powerful
frequency, actually you
are totally safe out there.
And there is no harm if we
can step into that frequency.
But if we are unaware of
that before we go out,
it can have consequences.
>>REGINA: Well, let's also talk
about when you encounter beings
and you think you're dreaming.
Or you may know
you're not dreaming,
and you're actually
passing through that place
just before you enter
back into this reality.
That passes through where a
lot of disincarnate entities
are and exist.
And one of the things I
have learned to understand
is, you don't want to entangle
yourself and go touching beings
or let them touch
you in this place
upon entering back into the body
and into this reality again.
Have you had any
experience with that?
>>MORLEY: It's interesting.
The Buddhist view,
right, is that this
is a compassionate universe.
There is no dark energy.
There's no evil.
This is a
compassionate universe.
And you are a fully
enlightened Buddha.
You just haven't fully
woken up to that yet.
So from that case,
no, there's nothing
to be scared of when we go out.
But it's-- it's
almost to say, well,
it's all very good for
Buddhists to say that.
That's because Buddhists spend
the whole time practicing
love and compassion.
So I think if you are
a practitioner of love
and compassion, the
universe reflects that.
So yes, it becomes a
compassionate universe.
And there is
nothing to harm you.
However, how many
billions of people
are there in the
world today who aren't
coming from a point of
love and compassion?
And so the universe will reflect
the duality of both good and--
>>REGINA: Yes,
especially when you're
tripping through all these
different dimensions coming
back into your body.
You just don't know if
you're going to kind of pass
through a little more slowly at
certain dimensions sometimes.
>>MORLEY: Yeah, so the
Buddhist view is-- no,
you're totally safe.
It's a compassionate universe.
But I think we're
totally safe and this
is a compassionate
universe if we are
coming from a point of love.
>>REGINA: Right, and still
maybe just to be wise
and not entangle
when you're there.
That's their world.
It's not your world.
And send love.
I mean, that's happened a couple
times where I tripped through
and realized I'm in
that in-between place.
And just sending love to
the other person that's
reaching out to be recognized or
touched is more than adequate.
>>MORLEY: Exactly--
the same rules apply
within the lucid dream state.
A lot of people, when they have
their first few lucid dreams,
they like to run around.
They know-- oh, everything
in here is me, right.
So they go after dream
characters and say--
hey, you're just a dream.
And the dream character kind
of looks a bit upset and goes--
no, I'm not.
I'm real.
And they-- no, no,
I'm lucid dreaming.
You don't even exist.
And I think-- what's
the point of that?
What is to be gained from this
kind of power play ego trip
by telling our dream
characters they don't exist?
Now, perhaps they don't exist.
But in their reality
of your dream, they do.
So I don't think it's anything
to be gained by doing that.
>>REGINA: No, I don't either.
>>MORLEY: So what I say
is-- once you're lucid,
run around your lucid
dream hugging everything.
Hug the people.
Definitely hug the scary people.
Hug the table.
Hug the trees.
If everything in the
lucid dream is us,
then show everything love.
And if you run around
your lucid dreams
hugging everything,
the next day, of course
you feel amazing.
Because you've had 1,000
internal psychological hugs.
And so too are you
rewiring the brain
to be more likely to hug life.
Maybe not literally hugging the
people on the tube underground.
But you could hug them
with your intention.
>>REGINA: Yes, you
wouldn't want to try that.
>>MORLEY: Why don't you try it
in London and see what happens?
>>REGINA: Yeah, see
what happens-- exactly.
OK, so this is
something I've always
been curious about when I've
interviewed people and also
just in daily life talking
with people about dreams.
I don't think this
is a prejudice.
It's my observation
that men seem
to be much more prone
toward the nightmare scape
and violent dreams than women.
And my guess is-- this
is my own point of view.
So I'm labeling it as such.
That if one has been incarnating
dominantly male, for example--
or dominantly female--
you carry a set
of historical experiences.
And if you've been
incarnating dominantly male,
you've been exposed probably
to a lot of warfare, violence,
and that sort of thing.
And so that's stuck there in
your being, in your matrix,
right.
And you're having to play
it out in dream time more.
>>MORLEY: It's a very
interesting theory.
And because it's the
first time I've heard it,
I don't want to
agree or disagree
until I've had time
to mull it over.
But it sounds very interesting.
How you were
speaking, what it did
make me think of though
was the possibility
of a toxic masculinity
that a lot of men
nowadays are working with
being expressed in the dream
state in the form of nightmares,
or at least in a conflict.
I'm sure that goes for
people in female sex too
and people of fluid gender.
But it is interesting to look
at the traits of dreaming
that occur between
the genders, even
between the nationalities,
and even between the ages.
And I've spent the last 10 years
traveling 21 countries around
the world-- everywhere
from Zimbabwe to Mexico--
teaching lucid dreaming.
And I love to see--
what were the dreams
of a Zimbabwean witch
doctor compared to a
Mexican psychotherapist?
And actually, what I've seen
is, they're not so different.
That actually, the
presentation, the coloring,
the kind of brush
strokes may be different.
But the overall canvas of
what people dream about,
the concerns they have,
the emotional issues that
arise within the dream is kind
of universal and beyond sex
and gender.
>>REGINA: Interesting--
yeah, I was just
making that observation.
Because I always hear about
these violent nightmares
with men.
But I don't hear about
that from the women.
Women, a nightmare is--
my boyfriend left me.
It's a different kind
of nightmare, right.
>>MORLEY: Still pretty scary.
>>REGINA: Scary, but oftentimes
relational, abandonment.
It seems like with
women, abandonment
is a really big one.
Whereas with men,
it's actually having
to fight off the bogeyman.
>>MORLEY: Well, there's
interesting theories
if you look at the neurological
basis of why we dream.
So modern day neuroscience
doesn't acknowledge
an unconscious in the
same way as Carl Jung
would describe the unconscious.
But it acknowledges
unconscious processes.
And modern day research believes
that the reason we dream,
and specifically the
reason we have nightmares,
is perhaps the
reason that's got us
the top predator on the planet.
Because when we were
cave men and cave women,
if we could dream about running
from the saber tooth tiger,
the next night fighting saber
tooth tiger, the next night
hiding up a tree from
the saber tooth tiger,
next week, if we were to
encounter the saber tooth
tiger, we were more
likely to survive.
Because we had rehearsed these
scenarios within our dreams.
So sometimes, I think, when we
have dreams based on the four
Fs of the reptilian brain--
feeding, fighting, fleeing,
and the other one--
>>REGINA: We know what--
sex.
>>MORLEY: Yeah,
we'll use the S word,
but I won't use the F word.
That sometimes it's actually
just our brain mechanisms
kind of running through these
processes to help keep us safe.
So sometimes, people freak out.
Oh, I had a really sexy dream.
I had a really violent dream.
Is there something
wrong with me?
And actually, from a
neurological point of view,
it could be just
an updating, a bit
like when your iPhone updates.
>>REGINA: Right,
right, overnight--
>>MORLEY: Yeah, to kind
of keep you safe so
that the next day, if
you encounter violence,
you're more prepared.
If you encounter
sexuality, you're
more prepared to
engage sexuality--
to feed yourself, to flee.
>>REGINA: Right,
interesting-- well,
it seems like because the
scape is so broad in terms
of the type of dreams we have.
And like you say,
99% of the dreams
may be addressing
aspects of ourselves.
But there are other things.
And I want to talk about
two types of anomalies.
One of them is the 1%, where
other things are happening.
And I'm going to run a
couple of cases by you too.
But then, there's
this other thing
I notice in my own dream time--
not the traditional,
ordinary kind of dream.
But there will be
large phenomena
that are taking place,
often in the sky,
where something starts
shining and sparkling
and lining up and taking
on geometrical form.
And then, actually a couple
of weeks ago this happened.
The geometrical form, the
lines started connecting.
And it turned into a
feline type of mechanism
that jumped out of the sky.
And I was inside
a room looking out
a window watching this
thing happen, and so
were other people.
It was a phenomenon--
a cosmic phenomena--
that was happening, that was
pouncing down onto Earth,
for example.
>>MORLEY: So your
dream there sounds
like a perfect example of
what within Tibetan Buddhism
we might class as
a clarity dream.
So within Tibetan
Buddhism, there
are three main types
of dream class.
Samsaric dreams, which are
dreams based on our experience
of samsara, which is
unenlightened existence.
So until we're fully awakened,
we're experiencing samsara.
So samsaric dreams are your
everyday dreams, non-lucid.
Then, we have clarity dreams.
Within clarity dreams,
the two main aspects
are lucid dreams-- dreams
where you know that you're
dreaming as you're dreaming.
But also, just clarity
dreams themselves,
which are dreams of
archetypal significance.
Dreams where one might
receive spiritual teachings,
dreams where one might
receive an insight of clarity.
And that dream there sounds
like a clarity dream.
That was not your average dream
based on a daily experience.
And you can feel it.
People say-- how do I know
if it was a clarity dream?
Because the next
day, you'll feel it.
You'll remember it.
It will have
emotional resonance.
Sometimes even somatic,
physical, resonance.
And you realize--
OK, that dream wasn't coming
from my everyday mind.
That was coming from
something deeper.
Perhaps it was coming
from my Buddha mind--
my essentially, innately
enlightened essence.
Which every now and again
bursts through like a geyser
bursting through the earth.
And we get these
flashes of insight.
And through dream practice,
and through the training
that you obviously
are already doing,
we have more of these clarity
dreams and less samsaric
dreams.
Until it's said we're a fully
awakened being, dreams--
they stopped having
samsaric dreams.
So the only dreams they
have are the lucid dreams,
clarity dreams,
or the third type,
which is called clear
light experiences.
Which is an experience of
non-dual awareness within often
the deep sleep state.
That's definitely
beyond my paygrade.
But those are very, very
special experiences.
>>REGINA: Why do dreams
feel more real than life?
What is it that's unbounded
there that makes a dream--
a clear dream-- live
within our mind,
within our field
of memories, even
so much stronger than a
quote earthly experience?
>>MORLEY: Great question--
a lot of people wake
from a lucid dream.
And they say the lucid dream
was like realer than real.
It was an experience
of hyper-reality.
And when you hear
people speak like that,
it can be easy to think they're
entering into hyperbole.
But actually, they're not.
A lucid dream is literally an
experience of hyper-reality.
For example, right now our
experience of this reality
is limited by our senses.
Our experience of touch is
limited by the sensitivity
of our fingertips.
Our experience of taste,
which I've already
as I'm getting older noticed
is declining with age.
I'm liking spicier foods.
I need more to get
that kick, right.
Eyesight-- any viewers who wear
glasses will know that right
now our experience of reality--
what we see-- is limited by
our vision, by our eyesight.
In the lucid dream, though,
you have perfect vision.
Because you're not
seeing through your eyes.
You're seeing through your mind.
In the lucid dream, you
have 100% taste capacity.
Because your experience
of taste is not
being tasted through the
tongue but through your mind.
Your experience of
touch, when people
say-- oh, when I touched
things in the lucid dream,
it felt so real.
It's because it's not
limited by the touch
senses on your fingertips.
It's through the unlimited mind.
So you can actually
experience a deeper sense
of reality, whatever that means,
in the lucid dream than you can
in the waking state.
And the cool thing is,
you can even boost it.
So you can do things
in the lucid dream
that boost your experience.
For example, eyesight--
I used to wear glasses.
And I was giving
a talk once where
I spoke about how I
healed an ear infection
through lucid dreaming.
I went into a lucid dream.
I did hands-on healing.
I sent out affirmations
of healing intent.
And the ear
infection got better.
I actually got heckled.
This dude-- it was a music
fest-- he heckled me.
I was wearing glasses.
He said-- oh, why don't
you fix your eyesight?
And I was so embarrassed.
And I went red.
And I just felt so ashamed.
And then I thought--
OK, if this is all a dream,
why did your shadow aspect,
this man, come into this dream
and give you that challenge?
Maybe it's a gift.
So I thought-- all
right, next lucid dream
I'm going to go
in there and try.
So I went into the lucid dream,
and I thought-- all right,
I'm going to heal my eyes.
So I did hands-on healing,
put my hands over my eyes.
I called out-- my
eyes are healed.
My immune system is boosted.
My eyesight is fixed.
Nothing happened.
I went in again a week later.
And I thought-- I'll
bring in the big guns.
So I tried the Tibetan Buddhist
mantra of the medicine Buddha.
In Tibetan Buddhism, there's
a mantra for everything--
a mantra to say when you're
going to the toilet, a mantra
to say when you
having sex, a mantra
to say when you're meditating.
>>REGINA: So what
is the Tibetan--
can you share it?
>>MORLEY: I can.
The medicine Buddha mantra--
om bhaisajye bhaisajye
mahabhaisajye bhaisajyaraje
samudgate svaha.
>>REGINA: It sounds German.
>>MORLEY: Probably just
my terrible pronunciation.
>>REGINA: No, no-- it
just sounds German.
OK, say that again,
so somebody can
have a chance of going back
over it and memorizing it.
>>MORLEY: Om bhaisajye bhaisajye
mahabhaisajye bhaisajyaraje
samudgate svaha.
Any Tibetan scholars
out there, I'm
sorry for my mispronunciation.
>>REGINA: Well,
you've impressed me.
But I don't know the
difference, right.
>>MORLEY: So I got lucid.
And I think-- wow,
I'll do the mantra.
So I start calling
out the mantra,
doing the hands-on healing.
And the dream did
start to shake.
Which for me often
represents a change.
But I woke up.
And actually,
nothing had changed.
I felt really good
because I said the mantra.
But nothing had changed.
Third time, lucky--
I get lucid a few days later.
I'll go in.
I'm about to say the mantra.
I'm about to do the
hands-on healing.
And then, like an
intercom over the dream,
this voice, my voice, said--
the reason you can't
see long distances
is because there is a
conflict within your eyes.
And for a minute, I
thought-- who said that?
That was me.
And I thought-- what a weird
thing to say, but he's right.
All illness is
based on conflict.
There's a conflict between
the muscles and the lens
or a conflict between what I
don't want to see in my life.
So in the lucid dream, I
forgot about the mantra.
I forgot about the
hands-on healing.
I flew into the sky.
And I called out in
the lucid dream--
my eyes a free of conflict.
My eyes a free of conflict.
And the dream was
like an earthquake.
So I go chssshhh.
And I thought-- oh,
something is happening.
Something's happening.
And I wake up.
And I haven't worn
my glasses since.
>>REGINA: Oh, that
is so powerful.
I love that story.
How bad was your eyesight?
>>MORLEY: OK, so I needed
it for theater, films.
I mean, it was pretty bad.
My friends used to
do this kind of game
where when we were driving
down the motorway, the highway.
They used to ask me
to read out signs
because I was so bad
at seeing the signs.
So pretty.
And is it perfect now?
No-- but it is a hell of
a lot better than it was.
>>REGINA: That's amazing.
>>MORLEY: So people
have said-- oh, it's
just the placebo effect.
Yes, but don't ever say
"just" before a phenomenon
like the placebo effect.
The placebo effect is the
most replicable finding
of medical research.
People forget that.
It's 60% to 80%, right.
So yes, it was just a placebo.
But if we think of the placebo
being the mind affecting
the body, imagine what happens
if you engage the placebo
effect within the mind, within
a huge three-dimensional
visualization of
your own psychology.
It's the placebo
effect but times 1,000.
>>REGINA: And you said
something interesting there.
Because you said the third time.
And oftentimes in dreams,
three is important--
triplets of experience.
Let's talk about
that phenomenon.
>>MORLEY: I think sometimes
we give up too soon.
People have a lucid dream.
And maybe they want to
heal their inner child.
They had childhood trauma.
So they get lucid.
And one of the best
ways to do this
is to call forth
your inner child--
the personification of
your childhood experience.
So they get lucid.
They call out for
the inner child.
And nothing happens.
And they wake up and
say-- it hasn't worked.
Now, think who your
inner child is.
Maybe they're shy.
If they're traumatized,
they're definitely shy, right.
So calling them once
isn't going to be enough.
>>REGINA: They're
hiding under the porch.
>>MORLEY: Exactly-- but
if we can go back there
a second time, a third time.
I call my inner
child little Chuck.
Because when I was a kid
I was always called Chuck.
So I say-- little Chuck.
And eventually, he comes.
But I have to show little
Chuck I come in peace.
I've come to heal.
I've come to say I love you.
I've come to make things right.
So often, I don't think--
maybe it's not even
the rule of three.
Maybe it's the rule
of trying again.
They say with certain Buddhist
teachings-- you as the lama
once, they'll say no.
You ask them a second time,
they'll say stop asking.
You ask them a third time,
they'll give you the teaching.
Maybe it's the
same with eyesight.
>>REGINA: So you talk about
anomalies in the book.
And you say-- look
out for anomalies
because those are
what are giving
a very specific
indication in the dream.
>>MORLEY: Exactly-- so these
are called dream signs.
So one of the easiest
ways to get lucid
is, first of all, to
keep a dream diary,
to start recording your dreams.
Anyone out there who thinks--
I don't remember my dreams--
I would advise them to try.
It seems like a trick question.
But when I meet
people who say they
don't remember their dreams,
I say-- when did you last try?
And they go-- oh, well, I don't
try because I don't remember.
>>REGINA: You're
absolutely right.
It's just a matter of
instructing yourself--
I want to remember this
dream tonight or bring
through something that is
significant enough for me
to remember when I wake up.
I used to even say to
my subconscious-- wake
me at the moment
the dream ceases,
even if it's an
inconvenient time.
>>MORLEY: Perfect.
So anyone out there who's
forgotten their alarm clock,
and they're staying
awake worried that--
I have to wake up at 6
o'clock in the morning
to catch my flight.
They wake up at 5:59.
We know there is, what
Carl Jung referred to,
a conscious unconscious.
And that is the bit
we're talking to.
So first of all,
set our intention
to remember our dreams.
And then, document our
dreams in some way.
Write them down.
Now, in this practice, the
reason we write down our dreams
isn't so much to interpret them.
Although personally I'm quite
a fan of dream interpretation.
But that's a different kettle
of fish, as we say in England.
The reason we write down our
dreams is to spot patterns.
So let's say a couple
of weeks of writing down
our dreams every night, maybe
two or three dreams every night
if we can.
After a couple of weeks,
we've got this amount of data.
And we want to look through
this amount of data and spot
patterns.
So we see-- oh, wow, look.
Every week or so, twice a week,
I dream of my dead grandmother.
Or-- wow, once a week I
dream I'm naked in public.
Or-- wow, every few
days I have that dream
I've missed the train or
I've missed the bus to work
or whatever.
So we see these patterns.
And what we do is, we
create lucidity triggers.
So my one used to
be my dead grandma.
So before I went to sleep, I
would say-- all right, Charlie.
The next time you see
J-- my dead grandma--
you know that you're
dreaming because she's dead.
So it's gotta be the dream.
If between now and breakfast--
make it even more condensed.
If between now and breakfast
I see J, I am dreaming.
Or if between now and
breakfast I'm naked in public,
I'm hopefully dreaming.
You create these triggers.
>>REGINA: Or you've
taken something.
>>MORLEY: Exactly.
So you're probably dreaming.
So basically, yeah, you
write down your dreams.
You spot patterns,
these dream signs.
And then, you have the
intention to dream about them.
So a few months ago,
my dream signs--
probably because we've
been trying for a baby--
my dream signs became
talking baby animals,
like cute little
talking baby panda bears
and talking baby seals.
And this kept on coming.
I wasn't getting lucid.
And I said-- right, next time
I see a talking baby animal,
I know I'm dreaming.
And then, a few nights later,
the talking panda bears
came out.
But I'm engaged in deep
conversation about veganism,
actually.
The panda was upset that I was
vegetarian and not full vegan.
And I was saying-- well,
I'm trying, but it's hard.
I'm addicted to cheese.
>>REGINA: I'm not
drinking panda milk.
>>MORLEY: This panda was really
concerned with me being vegan.
And halfway through, I went--
am I discussing veganism
with a talking baby panda?
I've got to be dreaming.
I became lucid.
And then of course once
you're lucid, if you want,
you can ask the panda--
what do you represent?
And in this case, your
wish to have a baby.
And you're like--
oh, that's so cool.
And then you can go
off and do whatever
you want to do in the dream.
>>REGINA: Well, you would think
I would have been clued off
that I was in a dream when I was
dreaming about these little--
I dream about animals
that don't exist.
And this one was
a little pig dog.
And it's a little pig
that looks like a dog.
And it's all raw and pink
except for a little strip
of brown shag carpet
around the center.
>>MORLEY: I pray that
tonight I dream of a pig dog
and that I get
lucid at that time.
>>REGINA: I have dreams about
the craziest little animals.
They're all cute as can be.
But none of them
exist in this world.
They're strange little
hybrid creatures.
>>MORLEY: This is beautiful.
I love hearing this stuff.
Because I, straight away
when I hear people's dreams,
go-- it's their mind.
So I love the fact
that, in your mind
specifically, there are all
of these unrecognized cute
animals.
What does that say about you?
This mind has this
kind of creativity,
this mind that has this cute
animalistic aspect within it.
It's so great.
>>REGINA: I love it.
OK, so sex is common in dreams.
And you talk about this
a little bit in the book.
But one thing-- you
have a cautionary note.
Don't become addicted to going
there in your lucid dreams.
I mean, this is something
coming up big time
in the world of
virtual reality that's
going to be probably the number
one sales driver, is my guess,
is going to be sex.
>>MORLEY: Sex sells.
I've often thought if
I wrote a book called
Have Sex with your
Deeper Self: Learn
the Art of Lucid
Dreaming, I'd sell
a million more copies, right.
>>REGINA: There you go.
But let's talk about that.
Because you can do the same
thing in your dream time
in lucid dreaming.
>>MORLEY: Yes, I
learned to lucid dream
when I was 16 years old.
So you imagine this
16-year-old before he's
got into Buddhism,
who read these books,
gets quite good
at this practice,
and gains access to this huge
virtual reality simulation.
Which feels as real
as waking life,
where the rules of
society don't apply.
You can imagine what I
spent the first, like,
two years of my lucid
dreaming practice
doing-- sex and skateboarding.
Which at 16 were my
two favorite things.
Skateboarding I
was doing a lot of.
Sex not so much.
>>REGINA: Right, but
in your dream time.
>>MORLEY: Yes, so
I would get lucid.
And they would appear.
And they would
look so realistic.
And I'd have all this
sexual fantasy and stuff
and then go skateboarding.
And was it harmful?
Was it harmless?
I don't know.
Now I know all this stuff
about neural pathways.
I think-- maybe that
wasn't such a good thing
to be doing to my neural
pathways at that age.
>>REGINA: Right, because they
were definitely firing together
through repetition.
>>MORLEY: Exactly, and if I
look at some of my relationships
with women in those late
teens, I got into some trouble
with relationships
and objectification
and an out-of-control sexuality.
My main thing to
people now is, you
don't need to make
the same mistake
as 16-year-old completely
unawakened Charlie.
If you do want to engage
sex in lucid dreams,
there's nothing wrong with it.
I've worked with the
Portland guy Maxwell Hunter,
who was not born Maxwell.
He was born--
I don't know what his name was.
But he was born a
female, a woman.
And he was using
the lucid dream--
before he had transition
and the operation--
to go into the lucid dream
state and transform his body
into the body of a man.
He was exploring
gender and sexuality
within the lucid dream in an
incredibly deep and powerful
psychological way to aid
his psychological transition
from woman into man.
Another lady who was worried
actually about her sexuality--
it became a worry for her.
In the lucid dream state, she
was able to engage worry-free
sexual activity, same
sex relationship,
to explore this and realize--
OK, yes, there is part of
me that does enjoy this.
It's not that sex in
lucid dreams is wrong.
It's that getting addicted
to anything as an escapism
can be harmful.
So we need to be
careful with that.
>>REGINA: And besides, you
have VR goggles for it anyway.
Soon coming to a
theater near you.
>>MORLEY: Exactly.
But for your first few
lucid dreams, first time
we're lucid, why not
engage sexual fantasy?
But there comes a point where
we put away childish things.
And we go-- OK, we can spend
our lucid dreams just having
sex and fantasy.
But from a Buddhist
point of view--
a place where you have
seven times the power
of consciousness, a state where
you are closer to your fully
enlightened nature than
you are right now--
it would seem such a waste
to spend all our lucid dreams
doing that.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
and I thought
it was worth a
mention in your book.
And one of the things
I wanted to bring up
is repetitious dreams, where
we have repetitive dreams.
And sometimes they can last
a lifetime, or sometimes
just during a period of life.
And I'll just toss
one out as an example.
When I was very little--
probably I'm guessing ages
three to six, right in there--
I had dreams that there was
this gigantic spider that
would fill up half of a room.
And everyone around
would be dead except me.
And it would say--
you're fine.
You're fine.
You won't be harmed.
And I'm afraid of spiders.
>>MORLEY: And how long
did you have that dream?
>>REGINA: Well, I had
it for a few years.
>>MORLEY: When did it stop?
>>REGINA: I don't
think I had it probably
anymore after the age of
about seven is my guess.
>>MORLEY: What I would love
to do is to go back in time,
have you keep a dream diary
throughout your childhood
so we could see when
they were occurring
and also to see
when they stopped.
What happened during that
day in your seventh year
that integrated that aspect
of your psychology, which
was crying out to you again
and again to be integrated?
What happened during the day,
or perhaps in the dream, that
stopped it happening?
The great thing about
repetitious dreams
is they are the unconscious
saying-- you haven't quite
got the message yet.
So it will keep on giving
it to you again and again.
Which why so often
nightmares repeat.
So much more often
than the dream
where you're having a lunch date
with your favorite Hollywood
actor.
Because the lunch date dream
with your favorite Hollywood
actor was fully integrated.
You loved it, right.
But the nightmares,
we reject, we deny.
So they have to keep coming
back with the same message.
I had one where--
when my dad left
my mom, I started
having these recurring
dreams about my dad
appearing as a really
violent figure.
And I thought I was
cool with my dad.
I was in my mid-20s by now.
But obviously, it wasn't.
My psyche was saying-- no, man.
Your father archetype is
wounded and is violent.
So I did the work.
And I did a brilliant exercise
from a book called Manhood.
One of these chapters is
about fixing your relationship
with your dad.
And it involved spending
a day with your dad,
getting him to journey
back into his past,
go back to his school, go
back to where he was born,
ask him about his father--
this great kind of deep
psychological work.
The day after I did that
practice day with your dad,
the dream changed.
I dreamed of my dad.
And it was the first time in
about a year since he broke up
with Mum that he didn't
appear was a violent figure.
He appeared his normal size.
We were sitting by a river bank.
And he was feeding me
sandwiches in silence.
And I woke up and thought--
I've done it.
We've done it.
We've integrated
our relationship.
I didn't need to pick
up the dream dictionary
or speak to a dream
therapist for that.
It was so obvious.
He had gone from this
violent, aggressive figure
to a placid figure
that was nourishing me
as we sat by the water element.
>>REGINA: Right-- I
love those dreams where
it comes to that completion.
And I'm going to
toss one little one
in too-- repetitious dream that
lasted for probably 40 years.
Starting again and about three,
living in San Francisco, which
is where I'm from and was born.
And being in the
backseat of a car
that would be hurtling down
Venice Avenue toward the water
with no driver in the front.
So completely out of
control and afraid.
And then, I'd wake up
before the car would crash.
That's how it started.
Went through life, and I
get my driver's license.
Now I'm in control.
Now I'm on the driver's side.
And I have the wheel.
And I have passengers
I'm responsible for.
Slippery, snowy, icy roads--
navigating them to a
certain point of proficiency
but white knuckling
it the whole time.
The final dream ended
probably a decade and a half
ago now, maybe two
decades ago when
I was in the city of Berkeley.
It looked like a Wayne
Thiebaud painting,
these vertiginous
streets, like straight up.
And I was driving on this street
that was at a very steep pitch.
And I thought--
I don't know.
And then, I saw the top.
It looped back on itself
almost like a roller coaster
before it straightened out.
And I thought--
that's impossible.
That's physically impossible.
But I saw a red Corvette
do it ahead of me.
I watched the red Corvette.
And the driver was male.
And he executed it perfectly.
There were no other
drivers on this road.
And I thought-- if
I watched him do it,
that means it can be done.
And so I just hit it.
And I just knew what
to do and how much
to step on the gas to get
right through before stalling
out and making it over the
top onto the street ahead.
And that was it.
That was the end of those dreams
of having mastered this thing.
>>MORLEY: Yes, and
that dream sounds
like such a perfect
metaphor for life
because sometimes we
feel like we're hurtling.
And then, we have a
family or relationship.
And suddenly, there are other
people in the car with us.
And we're still hurtling.
But at a certain
point, we realize
that actually rather than
hurtling down, we're going up.
And it loops back.
And that we were always safe.
And it reminds you of a
quote from a Tibetan lama,
Chogyam Trungpa Rinpoche.
He said-- the bad news
is, you're falling.
The good news is,
there's no ground.
>>REGINA: Yes-- yeah, it felt
like a real accomplishment
in that I was
responsible for others.
It defied everything
I believed to be true.
But I did it anyway.
And so it was breaking
through that barrier
of what can be done, of
the impossible-- walking
through the wall, really.
>>MORLEY: Yes--
and again, I would
love to know what was happening
in your life at that time
that you had that
dream of completion.
Because it's never random.
It's never random.
Our dreams can seem random
because they're speaking
a language we don't understand.
And they can seem to
appear at random times.
Because most of us are
completely out of sync
with what's going
on with the moon
cycles, our own cycle,
all this kind of stuff.
But if we are in
sync, we realize
that we get the dreams we need
at exactly the right time.
There is an innate enlightened
intelligence within us
which shines through in
the dreams and guides us,
but only if we are willing to
listen and take our fingers out
of our ears.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
OK, let's talk about the 1%--
the 1% of times when
it's not just you.
>>MORLEY: OK, so 99% of
everything in the lucid dream
is your own psychology.
We know this from a
neurological point of view.
Because you can see the
different parts of the brain
firing when you're
riding a bicycle
in lucid dream, when you're
fighting in lucid dreams.
So they know it's connected
to the brain and the mind.
>>REGINA: But
might the mind just
be showing a processing
of a real experience?
>>MORLEY: Exactly.
So neuroscience will say-- oh,
everything in the lucid dream
is your own mind.
It's all your own psychology.
And I guess I used to
think the same thing too.
Tibetan Buddhism says--
no, we've got this wrong.
>>REGINA: I agree
with Tibetan Buddhism.
>>MORLEY: Yeah, and then my
experience showed it was wrong.
There are times--
I'd say it's 1% of the time.
Maybe it's more like
10% of the time.
Where we are experiencing
something in our lucid dream
state that is not us, that is
sourced from something wider.
I've noted three main
places this comes from.
One is from the
collective unconscious--
deep, archetypal,
oceanic consciousness
that exists both within
our own unconscious
but also in the
universal unconscious.
The appearance of ancestors--
I believe when you have a
blood or bone ancestry, when
that ancestor dies, it
is far easier for them
to communicate through
your lucid dreams
than it is in the waking state.
Because right now,
it's so solid.
We feel so separate.
There's such duality here.
Whereas if this was
a lucid dream now,
I'd know that it was my inner
you, that this table was me.
So I'm already in a state
moving towards non-duality.
So it would be a
preferential state
for ancestral communication.
And the third one is--
again, I can't give you
any science for this.
But I can tell you I believe it.
An epiphenomenon of full
spiritual enlightenment
is the ability to enter
other people's dreams.
Now, people might
get freaked out.
Oh, this means people
can enter my dreams.
Only the good guys can do it
because it's an epiphenomenon
of full spiritual awakening.
So if someone is fully
spiritually awakened,
you want them to be
coming into your dream
to give you teachings and to
help you, and to guide you.
So anyone who's worried
about-- oh, the dark shamans
being able to get
in my dreams-- no.
The level of consciousness
required to intentionally enter
into somebody else's
dream while they're lucid
is so high that it
negates the harmful people
from being able to do it.
>>REGINA: Absolutely--
and what about the voice?
When you hear the voice,
it's giving very important
instructive information.
>>MORLEY: I read
something recently
by Carl Jung where he talked
about the voice of the highest
self in a dream seeming
like it was coming
from kind of a third person.
So in that dream I had
where I healed my eyes,
and it was like a voice--
my voice-- but coming over
almost an intercom.
I thought-- that
was my higher self.
That was what in
Buddhist terminology
we would call the Buddha nature,
the already-awakened aspect
of our self.
Carl Jung called it
the self with a big S.
And then, the post-Jungians
call it the higher self
to make that kind
of differentiation.
I truly believe
that higher self can
talk to us in the
lucid dream state
as well as the waking state.
But we have the
eyes open to see it
and the ears open to hear it
far better in the lucid dream
than we sometimes do
in the waking state.
>>REGINA: Because
sometimes it can
bring in symbolism
or imagery that's
familiar or linked up with
what they're about to tell you.
So you're already in a
prepared state to hear it.
>>MORLEY: Your higher
self will appear to you
in your lucid dreams
based upon and sourced
from your personal relationship
to your internal archetypes.
So for example, my higher
self in the lucid dream
will often appear as Buddha or
my guru Lama Yeshe Rinpoche.
A Christian practitioner,
their higher self
might appear in the dream
as Mother Mary or Jesus.
A Sufi practitioner,
one of the great poets
Rumi or Hafez might appear in
the lucid dream as their higher
self.
It's the same as when we die.
The same process occurs.
But your angels
and your demons are
different from my
angels and my demons.
They will be based on
our archetypal internal
relationships.
>>REGINA: So do
you or do you not
believe that we
can actually meet
with each other in dream time?
>>MORLEY: I believe
it is possible.
I believe-- because
the lucid dream state
is said to be a state
where your sixth sense
capacity or clairvoyance is
heightened-- that if you were
in a lucid dream and I was in
a lucid dream at the same time.
So we were both sleeping at the
same time, physical reality.
The possibility of
psychic communication
would be hundreds
of times greater
than the possibility of
psychic communication right now
in the waking state.
So yes, it is possible.
And yes, it is try-able.
And I would ask
people to experiment.
If you and your partner can
get into lucid dreaming,
see if you can
communicate psychically.
>>REGINA: OK, so in your
book, you write about Antonio
and smoking and
overcoming smoking.
So we're going to
give a really kind
of simple, direct example of
how you can help heal something.
>>MORLEY: So Antonio
saw me give that talk
where I was referencing how
I healed my ear infection.
And it was at a music festival.
So he came to me
and was saying--
do you think I can heal
my addiction to nicotine
through the lucid dream?
And if so, how?
And I was talking about-- oh,
you could go in the lucid dream
and call out affirmations.
I live a healthy lifestyle
free of the addiction
of cigarettes-- classic
hypnotic suggestion stuff
in the lucid dream.
But he was way more
creative than me.
He got lucid.
And he thought-- well, where
is the source of my addiction?
For him, he believed the source
of his addiction was his brain.
So he became lucid.
And once he was lucid--
oh, wow, I'm dreaming.
OK, I'm asleep in bed.
But now I'm in my mind.
He called out to meet his brain.
So he goes-- my brain, my brain.
And this woman walks in.
And he's like--
are you my brain?
And she's kind of nonplussed and
goes-- yeah, I am your brain.
And he goes-- wow, well,
how am I physically?
And she goes-- you're OK.
But you know what
you need to stop?
And he kind of--
it's the smoking, isn't it?
She went-- yep.
Was kind of like that with him.
And he went-- well,
how can I stop?
And she looked at him.
And he said-- well,
every time I think
about a cigarette, every
time I want a cigarette,
will you make me think
of something else
or do something else?
And his brain in the form of
this woman just went-- yep.
And he woke up.
Short lucid dream-- we're
talking like 30 seconds, right.
And he didn't smoke
again for two weeks.
Two weeks later, he emails me.
He tells me this dream.
To be honest, I'm
a bit skeptical.
I was thinking-- well, maybe it
was just a big dose of placebo
because it was such
a strong lucid dream.
Can you let me
know in two months?
Two months later, I
get another email.
He's like-- I'm still
not smoking, dude.
Now at this point, I'm
writing the second book.
So I'm thinking-- oh,
what a great case study.
But I've got to make
sure this is for real.
So I thought-- well,
I can't just ask him.
I need to call
someone close to him.
So I spoke to his boyfriend,
who's called Charlie actually.
And Charlie is a smoker
and was still a smoker.
So Charlie was
smoking around him.
He said-- yeah, he hasn't
smoked since the lucid dream.
But also, something
strange has happened.
Antonio usually does
our weekly shop.
And I give him the
list of everything
to buy in the shops, including
my weekly cigarettes.
And he said-- for a
couple of weeks now,
Antonio has come back with
everything on the list
from the shops but
not the cigarettes.
Why could that be?
And then I thought--
OK, I remember from my hypnosis
training in my early 20s.
There's something called
negative hallucination.
Which is if you can implant a
hypnotic suggestion deep enough
into someone's unconscious,
they will literally not
see what you have
hypnotized them to see.
And I thought-- could it be
that he was literally not
even seeing the word cigarette
on the shopping list?
I don't know.
But since then,
I've wheeled Antonio
out in London a few times
actually to show he exists.
>>REGINA: I love it.
>>MORLEY: But the last time he
came, I was teaching nearby.
And I said-- oh, here's Antonio.
He hasn't smoked for two years.
And he went--
And I was like--
what do you mean?
He went--
Oh, OK-- it turns out Antonio
has smoked for two years.
I thought-- oh, no.
So I gave him the mic.
And he said--
OK, I just wanted to check
if it was still in place.
Because it had
been two years now.
So I did have a cigarette.
I said-- oh, well, what happened
when you had the cigarette?
He said-- I had two puffs,
and they were disgusting.
So he even tested it two years
later, and was still in place.
Again, viewers might think--
oh, just a heavy dose
of the placebo.
Yep, but so what?
It works.
>>REGINA: The one thing
that does work is placebo.
So we'll put that against
most any chemical solution.
People love flying dreams.
Comment on flying dreams.
And then, add in another
couple archetypal dreams
and what you think their
particular meaning is.
>>MORLEY: So I used
to think that once you
got lucid in a dream and you
chose to fly that maybe it's
kind of a waste just spending
your lucid dreams flying about.
And then, I looked into the
Tibetan literature on it.
And actually, they say
flying in a lucid dream
is a great thing to do.
Because it expresses freedom.
And it moves the mind beyond
its habitual limitations.
Because just like walking
through a brick wall,
what is the other
thing that human beings
believe to be impossible?
Human flight-- so actually,
when we fly in a lucid dream,
what's happening to
our neural pathways?
When we fly, I mean, it's
creating neural pathways
saying the impossible
is possible.
Now, how will that
affect our waking life--
that impossible business
project, that impossible
creative venture, that
impossible relationship
that we've always
thought was beyond us?
If we fly in our lucid
dreams, maybe that's
creating an atmosphere
of possibility that
will affect our waking state.
>>REGINA: That's interesting.
I would have never
thought of it that way.
Give us a couple
archetypal dreams
like flying that many
people experience that have
that kind of great value.
>>MORLEY: There's an
interesting archetypal dream
around teeth falling out.
Now, a lot of people have this.
Again, from Zimbabwe
to Mexico you'll
find people having this dream.
And people ask-- why
is it so universal?
Think about what your
teeth are used for.
They're used to feed
you and to protect you.
Now, we think if someone were
to come in here and attack us,
we'd fight with our fists.
Back in the day,
you would bite them.
So actually, with our
teeth falling out, often we
have that dream when we're
feeling like we can't feed
ourselves, money worries, or
we can't protect ourselves,
relationship worries,
socioeconomic worries.
Now, if you can get
lucid in a dream
where your teeth
are falling out,
you can actually ask the dream--
what does my teeth
falling out represent?
And the dream will respond.
A dream character could
literally walk in and say--
dude, you've got to get
your finances in order.
We're struggling here.
I'm trying to help you.
But you need to sort
this out in real life.
And it's amazing what you can
get from the dream if you ask.
It seems so simple.
But just two weeks ago,
I was feeling stuck.
I felt like I had so
many projects that had
come to an end in this year.
What was the next big project?
So I got lucid.
And I called out to the dream--
show me what I need to see.
Not show me what I want to see.
Show me what I need to see.
Instantly, the dream transformed
and gave me a very powerful
indication about continuing
doing the work I've
been doing with veterans.
I'm working with veterans,
a lot of who are PTSD
and the PTSD nightmares
that come with them.
And this year, I realized
my biggest project this year
will be work with veterans.
And the dream is
supportive of that.
So it's give me
a whole new sense
of confidence
toward that project
that I simply didn't have
before that lucid dream.
>>REGINA: I love it.
And you're doing a big
project in America.
Is it the Veterans
Association, or who is it with?
>>MORLEY: So the
project in America
is funded by a UK organization
called the Winston Churchill
Scholarship Foundation.
You have to apply
for all these things.
And they whittle you down to a
short list, super short list.
Then, you have an
interview process.
And I got a scholarship
to go to America
and study best practice
in mindfulness-based PTSD
treatment.
So I'll be working with
Bessel van der Kolk.
He wrote a book called
The Body Keeps the Score.
I'll be working with
Richard Miller, who
developed something
called iRest, which
is a form integrative yoga
nidra especially for trauma
survivors.
And then, I'll be
coming back to the UK
and developing a new workshop
for UK veterans and veterans'
family members, who are
just as important to work
with as the veterans themselves.
How we can use lucid dreaming
and mindfulness of dream
and sleep to help with
nightmares and PTSD.
>>REGINA: Good work--
OK, we just have a
little bit of time.
So we've already said,
before you go to sleep,
you need to set the intention
that you want to have
a dream that you can recognize.
And you tell yourself
to wake up enough
at the right time to be able
to record that dream, right?
>>MORLEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: Give us
the rest of the list
and also some supplements
that can help with dreaming.
>>MORLEY: Brilliant.
So yeah, those first three
things on the list I'd say--
set the intention to
remember your dreams.
Not even lucid dreams,
just normal dreams.
Then, document your
dreams in some way.
Write them down.
Draw them.
Even dance them.
Whatever you want to do
to show the dreamer--
I'm listening.
After decades of not
listening, I'm now listening.
People say-- I don't
write down my dreams
because they're so boring.
I say-- you have boring dreams
because you don't write them
down.
You need to let the
dreamer know I'm listening.
So we document our
dreams in some way.
We use our dream diaries
to spot these patterns.
Then, we set triggers that the
next time I see what I often
dream about--
my dead grandmother or
talking baby animals--
I will know that I'm dreaming.
These are our first three
steps towards lucidity.
Another thing you
can do-- very simple.
As you fall asleep tonight, in
the second half of the night
if possible-- so if you
wake up to pee in the night
or something like that.
More likely to have your longer
dreams in the second half.
As you're falling back asleep
in the second half of the night,
just be reciting over
and over in your mind--
tonight I recognize my dreams.
Tonight I'm lucid in my dreams.
Tonight I recognize my dreams.
Tonight I am lucid in my dreams.
When we fall asleep, we
pass through something
called the hypnogogic state.
Which, if we see from
the root of the word,
it's close to hypnosis.
It's a natural
state of hypnosis.
So if as we pass
through that, we
engage the hypnotic suggestion
to become lucid in our dreams,
we engage a very powerful
intention that may well
help us get lucid tonight.
>>REGINA: I love it.
It's been an absolutely
delightful conversation.
Thank you.
One final thing-- what
are the supplements that
often help with going into
dream time a little more easily?
>>MORLEY: Vitamin supplements?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>MORLEY: OK, the only
natural supplements
that I could advise
people to try
are things with high
B vitamin content.
If you can get it naturally
through things like spirulina,
kale which is super trendy now,
spinach, anything dark, green,
leafy vegetables--
loads of B vitamins.
If you haven't quite
got that in your diet,
then if you were to have a
little B vitamin supplement you
can buy from a pharmacy
after a few hours of sleep,
it won't do you any harm.
It will be good for you.
And it will give you longer
REM periods, dream periods,
in which you can
recognize your dreams.
>>REGINA: Very
good-- thank you so
much for the how-to part of it.
And thank you for the
entire conversation.
It was absolutely delightful.
>>MORLEY: Thank you.
It's been a pleasure.
>>REGINA: And thank you for
driving to join us here.
Since everyone loves
the subject of dreams,
you might want to pick up
a copy of "Lucid Dreaming"
available at all
major booksellers.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
in London for "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]